How did you get interested in costuming?
Well actually, I've always been interested in pretty clothes as it were.
But I actually, to go to where I got interested in costuming, you kind of have to go back to the beginning of fandom.
And for me, I'd been interested in science fiction literature since around the beginning of junior high,
when I discovered that I didn't have all that many friends and there wasn't much else to do.
And I was a ravenous reader and I read all the horror stories in the book, in the library,
all the dog stories in the library and I didn't like mysteries and I didn't like romances and all that was left was science fiction.
So I grudgingly took science fiction down off the shelf and started.
And I've been hooked ever since.
It was kind of like the most wonderful thing I'd ever discovered,
a genre of literature where your imagination can run completely wild.
And for a long time I knew absolutely nothing about fandom.
And then I discovered Star Trek.
Interestingly enough, my stepfather was watching it and I happened to sit down one evening
and I was hooked from then on because it was a wonderful world of the future
where all kinds of imaginative things were happening.
But more importantly, it was still a world about people and it was people conquering the future
and conquering problems and most of all conquering themselves.
And at the time, that was my biggest problem, was trying to learn how to deal with myself and deal with the people around me.
So I became an avid Trekkie and I still didn't know about fandom.
But one day after Star Trek, there was a big advertisement for a Star Trek convention in Dallas
and it was going to have some of the stars there and everything and I'd never heard of such a thing.
But it sounded like a lot of fun so we went down and then I ran into nearly 1,500 to 2,000 fans
who also liked Star Trek, who also had a reason for coming to science fiction and fantasy
and had been touched by Star Trek because of this feeling they had.
And all of a sudden I had a family and a place to belong.
And I've been an avid fan ever since going to as many conventions as I could.
And one aspect of this convention was costuming.
And I'd always been sort of interested in theater and that sort of thing but never really involved.
But here were all these people who weren't really in the theater and weren't performers
but they had all these wonderful costumes and were going up and doing the masquerades.
The next time they had a convention I was ready and I had my first costume.
It was a very poorly made mirror, mirror costume from the Star Trek episode, Mirror, Mirror.
But it was a beginning and it was something and all of a sudden I was involved
and I had a part in a world where in my day life I didn't have much of anything that I really belonged to.
And through fandom and science fiction and belonging to that world,
I eventually learned how to belong in a normal world again.
And basically it changed my entire life.
I actually even became popular in high school which at the time that I started in fandom
I would have thought that popularity was something I would never see.
And then it grew from there.
I became a theater and drama major at UTA.
And I now work as a professional singer and performer
and do a lot of costuming with that job and freelance costuming.
But my first love is still making characters come alive on the stage at science fiction and fantasy conventions.
Because I think that what I was searching for at the time was a reality that I could fit into
and I think that's what the other fans are searching for.
And the masquerade gives me a chance to make that dream become a reality.
Give us a specific example of bringing a character to life.
Alright, for example, one of our most successful costume skits that we designed
and I had some other people with me at the time, we went to World Con in Boston
and we had a young fellow who was a good friend of mine and my little sister did a Star Wars skit together.
But what they did was the lights darkened and the Star Wars theme came up.
Then all of a sudden Luke Skywalker came flying through the air doing somersaults onto the stage,
stopped and did a one-handed handstand very precariously balancing using the force to hold him up.
And then Yoda came slowly onto stage, nodding wisely and instructing him on the use of the force.
He didn't get it right the first time, then he tried again the second time
and finally succeeded with a perfect one-handed handstand balancing with the use of the force.
And then leapt up, did a couple more flying leaps and somersaults in the middle of the air across the stage and left,
standing ovation by 9,000 screaming people who for them Star Wars was alive.
And that particular skit that was one that I designed and my little sister and boyfriend at the time took part in
won the first prize for best presentation at a World Con.
And there were about 150 entrants in that masquerade.
But this was special because all of a sudden their characters were alive.
Another one that I have done has been extremely.
Wait a second. Back up and give us the kind of a genesis of how you put this all together.
Like how the costume, what, what, how the costumes got, how the idea for the action,
the little plot storyline that you had. Give us a little rendition of how that came together.
Okay, the way that skit came together is that we were sitting around and we wanted to go to World Con.
Of course, everyone wanted to take part in the masquerade because it's kind of your chance to be a star, as it were.
And the audiences at World Con are so large that it's probably the largest audience you will ever have, even if you do Broadway.
And my little sister was very interested in performing, but she only likes to perform behind a mask because that way she's more secure.
And my boyfriend was a gymnast. And so we decided we needed to do something to do a useful thing with his gymnastic skills.
And just recently we'd been asked by a theater to come and do a Star Wars performance for their opening of Empire.
And so we went and did the opening and built him a Luke Skywalker outfit for the opening.
And when he was there, he was playing around and discovered that he could do most of the force stunts just by virtue of his gymnastic training.
Because he'd been like fifth in the state in gymnastics.
And then my little sister started playing around and rehearsing and working on looking like Yoda and walking like Yoda and having the mannerisms.
And it dawned on me that since we had a special talent here, that we could make use of that to bring this special thing to fans
who had probably never dreamed of the fact that the force could be made to come alive.
And if we hadn't had a gymnast, we could have figured out a way to do it with wires and stuff, but it was that much more special because it was real and live.
And that was how that particular act came together.
Now I also have another one that has been extremely successful. It's called Morgan Le Fay.
And the character basically I was sitting around trying to think of what is a really way out character that's not all that well known,
but that could command the stage and make that same kind of reality come about.
And it occurred to me that very little has been done with the saucerist Morgan Le Fay, who's from the Arthurian legend and who was the one that eventually defeated Merlin.
And I thought if I can make this character do a spell on stage so that the audience really believes it, that that would be an excellent kind of costume to do.
So I designed the costume and of course it's different than designing a costume for a movie character or a television character because it was completely up to my imagination what I wanted to do with it.
So I used a lot of reds and blacks and lots of gold to create a total effect of color but somber, evil color and made a very large headdress with lots of sparkles on it to catch the light.
And designed it in such a way so that it would give the impression of an evil saucerist who had a lot of power and was a ruler in her own right.
And designed the cloak so that it would actually fold out into a half circle so that it would look like bat wings on the back.
The costume was beautiful but that's not enough. The next thing I did was I wanted to design something for her to do.
So I wrote a spell. I decided that she would probably be pissed at someone because she's usually angry at someone most of the time and was famous for destroying people and things.
So I wrote a spell wherein she was summoning the spirits of darkness who came and gathered around her and then she sends them off to go destroy all her enemies.
Which is nice but again that wasn't enough. So the next thing I did is I started listening to albums trying to find some music that would summon the mood because I wanted a very somber, evil mood sort of like the building of a thunderstorm.
And I finally came across in the album Lion in Winter a very somber, evil sounding piece of music which sounded very much like a thunderstorm building coming into the foreground and then receding.
And then I worked the spell so that it would work exactly around the crescendos. And then I added a soundtrack record which had thunder and lightning on it and went into my handy dandy little stereo set in the middle of the living room.
I bought a bunch of patch chords from Radio Shack so that the room looked like Spaghetti'sville and patched it all together and using a normal hand mic and a reverb effect from the speakers being on at the same time as the recording
managed to get an evil reverberating sound to the voice, lightning and thunder in the background, this awesome evil music building and flowing and a high climax and then fading out in the distance.
So I had a wonderful soundtrack and if the mic failed I'd still be fine because I had it all on tape. The next thing I did was I needed something else, something special that would still make it believable.
Now the sound was there and the sight was there but it needed something extra. So I went down to the Magic Store and bought a special Magic Gizmo and some flash paper and the way the actual skit came off was something like this.
The stage would darken and then you'd see a red glow moving up onto the stage and you'd see just the outline of this bizarre golden mask and headdress and a red garbed woman holding the red globe.
Then the music starts and starts to build and all of a sudden the spell starts and then suddenly there's a burst of flame from the red globe and then as the spell builds and she starts summoning the darkness the room gets darker for a moment
and then there's another burst of flame and the room starts to lighten just a little bit and the spell builds and builds until finally she banishes the light from her and says darkness be gone and then blasts this huge shot of fire, blue flame straight up into the sky and the darkness is gone
and then she tells you that she is Morgan Le Fay and then demonstrates the costume and shows the wide wings of the bat and slowly walks off as the thunder fades into the distance.
Again, I got a standing ovation. The costume has never not won a prize. It has always been first and second everywhere I've taken it and there are better costumes but it comes to life and that's what the people are looking for is a way to bring their fantasies and their dreams into reality so they can touch them so it's something they can really have a tangible experience from.
I've seen you do your thing before and it's not just walking up and showing the costume, striking a pose and leaving you have a performance that you do.
Exactly.
Just to re-enerate a little bit of why you decided to add that extra dimension.
Well, I've seen a lot of masquerades and when I started the thing was that everyone walked up there, turned around and walked off and it was nice but after about the 50th person it can get real boring and since the masquerade was designed with an audience in mind it seemed to me that there should be something more entertaining for them
and some people were doing little bitty skits and flourishes if they had a sword and stuff like that but it still wasn't enough. It was still Johnny in a costume trying to show off his sword or every now and then there would be a nice skit that was really funny and that was the high point.
But very few high points for a lot of people going through the line and showing their costumes and I started thinking about well what is a masquerade really supposed to be? What is it all about?
And also there was the fact that although I'm not a bad seamstress, neither am I equipped to go work for Warner Brothers Studios or something like that.
And it occurred to me that if I was going to win and if I was going to capture these people's imagination I'd do something more than walk up there with a brilliant costume, turn around and walk off.
And also I think part of it's the actress in me. If I'm going to do something and play like I'm a character, I want to play like I'm really that character.
I want to feel it and be it and make it as real as possible because it's more fun for me. If I'm going to be Princess Leah I'd like to have a chance to really feel like I'm Princess Leah out to save the Rebel Alliance or whatever.
And it seemed like that was what was lacking. The people were trying for that, they wanted to do that, they wouldn't have built the costume if they didn't want for a minute to feel like they were that hero or villain or whatever.
But the extra touches weren't there and so I decided that that would be a good thing to do.
And when I got to WorldCon I discovered that that was what was preferred.
And as a matter of fact now most WorldCon costumes are designed with the idea of trying to bring that character to life in some way and make a show of it even if it's only a minute long.
Because most of them it's good not to do it over a minute or a minute and a half.
But even in a minute or a minute and a half you can bring it to life.
And when I choose a character to do, when I'm trying to decide what I'm going to do for the next costume, the first question I ask is what is it about this character that is special that will bring this character to life?
What can I do to make this character stand out so it's not just a costume on a stage?
And if the answer is nothing, if there's nothing special about that character, that costume, I won't do it.
Okay.
There is costuming for movie characters and for literary characters.
Which one is more challenging? I would assume it would be the literary characters.
But what are the different challenges is it doing a movie character versus a written character?
Well, of course there are the two kinds like you mentioned, the media and the literary.
Actually, it depends.
I think one of my greatest challenges was recreating the characters from Heavy Metal, which I did last year.
Because the costumes were designed on animated figures and I was trying to recreate them onto live action figures exact in detail.
And for me, it is almost harder to do an exact detailed replica of an existing costume than to just be able to let my imagination go wild and do whatever.
And the reason for that is if you get it wrong, they're going to know.
Where if you're doing a costume from your imagination, you can make it very elaborate.
But if something doesn't work, you can say, oh well, I didn't like that effect anyway, let's do something different.
It takes more time and you have to put a lot more detail onto an imaginary costume.
But it takes an extreme amount of discipline and creativity to do an exact reproduction.
Unfortunately, the exact reproductions usually do the least winning unless you've got something special to add to them.
Because the inspiration for the costumes is available to anyone.
You know, go to the movies, go to TV, you can see the costumes.
And so we tend to have an overrun of Starfleet uniforms and Jawas and Stormtroopers and I remember one masquerade.
We had seven Lahan solos and five Luke Skywalker's and six Princess Leia's.
Wookiees are a little harder, but there have been two of them on occasion.
But yet they're very challenging to do to get them right and a lot of times you can spot that one's not quite right, but they don't do the most winning.
So usually when I do a media costume, it's not necessarily aimed for the masquerade.
It's usually aimed for something to bring the convention itself to life by wearing around the halls.
The exception being Tarna, we had a show we could put on with Tarna.
We recreated part of the movie on stage and we're able to do it convincingly in such a way again as to bring the character to life.
But if I couldn't have done that, I would have never put the character on the stage just to show off the costume.
Even though it was actually harder to build than Morgana, which was an imaginary costume.
I'm glad you brought that up about parading through the halls before the main show, but I want to get on that.
But are there any authors who, because of the way they write or the way they describe things, who you tend to gravitate toward when you do characters?
Actually, what I prefer to do when I'm doing a literary character is I prefer to pick a character that has the least description about what they are and the most potential.
Gods and goddesses are wonderful. Spirits are wonderful.
Things that you really can't imagine is belonging in the real world or the best things when you're doing an imaginary costume.
For example, if you're doing a snow spirit, you can go absolutely crazy on cloaks and full-spread backdrops and headdresses that reach from here to heaven and back.
And that kind of thing that are absolutely ridiculous for a real person to be wearing around the streets.
But if you're talking about a mythical being or a creature or spirit, you can go absolutely hog wild and they look the best on stage.
A set that we're working on right now, as a matter of fact, we're doing a series called The Three Fates and we're doing birth, death and destiny.
And again, these are spirits. They're characters that don't have any actual human parameters.
So we can go absolutely nuts on the costume as far as just getting the feeling across and doing anything we want to make something super flamboyant.
It's much harder to do an actual real living character because again, you have to deal with something that's possible that a person would actually wear around and still make it beautiful enough and interesting enough that it takes over the stage.
And if you don't have the skid or the characterization to go with it, no matter what you do or how well you do it, it's not going to cut it.
Okay, what about the wearing of the costumes during the con? You may not wear the same costume on stage that you do down the hall.
Yeah, I've noticed. I've noticed they're at the cons. They're the mass grade costumes and then they're the everyday wear...
Not stating as well.
Kind of the roll.
The everyday costume that once you wear during the con.
Exactly, exactly. Hall costumes versus stage costumes.
What's the difference?
The difference is that a hall costume, for example Starfleet uniforms are wonderful hall costumes.
They're terrible on the stage unless you've written a player's skit to go with them and which is the player's skit that does the winning, not the costume.
But they're wonderful for hall costumes because you can really be from the enterprise down on shore leave looking through a bazaar or going to lectures or whatever.
And there's a lot of the let's pretend we're bringing it to life in the everyday kind of syndrome with real people.
And this is where you can sink your teeth into a live character because this is where the live character type of outfits work so well.
You can be Conan or his lady or you can be a stormtrooper or Luke and Han and Leia and get into the everyday let's pretend aspect of it.
Where these characters would die on stage unless you have something special.
You don't have to be able to do anything to wear a hall costume.
And yet at the same time you can have a lot of fun.
It's fun for other people because it brings the convention to life.
Hey, they came here to get into science fiction and fantasy and wow, look, there's Han Solo right over there.
All of a sudden it's special for them.
And masqueraders and hall costumers are doing a service actually.
They're making fun for themselves because they can pretend but they're making fun for everyone else because they're making it come alive.
And that's why conventions are as popular as they are now anyway is because the fans are looking for a way to bring the whole thing out to make it more real.
To touch the authors that make this magic.
To touch the artists that create the magic.
To make it all something more tangible than just what they see in a book.
And the hall costumes are absolutely essential for that.
And then again we have a different kind of hall costume which is the medieval society costume and none of these are stage costumes.
They never are.
Most of them are much better made than stage costumes because they're clothes.
And the medieval society usually shows up at conventions to promote their club and to bring a touch of the fantasy element into it.
And bring the medieval ages to life and so forth.
And they have a completely different kind of costume but again it's a hall costume.
By the medieval society are you speaking to the society for creative and agronism or some other?
There are several.
There is the society for creative and agronisms which is most prevalent here in the Southwest and it's nationwide.
But down here it's the only one we have.
There also are the Marklanders which are a slightly different variation on the same kind of theme.
I believe there are one or two others but those are the two major ones.
So there's more than one kind of medieval society but the major one, the largest one is the society for creative and agronisms.
And they recreate all aspects of medieval life but since fantasy is such a big part of the science fiction and fantasy genre
and since most fantasies are based on a medieval way of life they fit right in to the convention scene.
Which kind of costumes are more essential to work on?
Science fiction type of costume or a fantasy costume?
Actually it really depends.
They're all fun to work on if you've got a good idea and some place to go with it.
And it doesn't matter whether they're science fiction or fantasy.
Most of the better costumes are fantasy simply because fantasy is so open-ended that you can go really berserk on what you're doing with it.
But I have seen some really phenomenal ideas to do for science fiction costumes as well.
The problem with science fiction is that most of it is technical and nuts and bolts and spacesuits and things like that.
And you have to really reach to find a creative way to do something different.
But I have seen some really phenomenal things done with robotics and weaponry and nuts and bolts things.
I prefer the fantasy type things because you don't have any limitations.
You don't have to make it look like it could work.
You can just go bananas on it.
But then again, McCaffrey has turned dragons into a science fiction character, which were once totally fantasy.
So who can say?
They're both equally challenging if you just have the right idea and an interesting enough idea to make it challenging.
At a masquerade, is there an error of competition or do people help each other and admire each other?
It's kind of one big happy family.
It depends where you are, just like any other competition.
It depends who's involved.
I have been in masquerades where it was tooth and nail and they were out for blood.
And I've been in masquerades where it was one big happy family and everybody was helping everybody else.
And they were glad when the best costume won and whoever won and it didn't matter.
So it really depends on where you are.
At WorldCon, a lot of times in the masters category, it's tooth and nail simply because these people are very, very good.
They're good at what they do and they really want to win because they've been at it for so long.
But at a small local convention, for example, the StarCon in Lubbock, it's very small, very friendly.
Everybody helps everybody.
For example, I'm probably going to be one of the judges and I've already loaned out about six things out of my costume wardrobe to help people out with their costumes.
You know, and don't feel anything about doing it.
I think that's the way where at a much larger convention where it was much more serious, I wouldn't do that because some people might be offended.
But we try to keep it a happy family and I've seen a lot less of the blood feud type masquerades than I have of the happy family type masquerades.
Because usually everybody's there for a good time and they're all there for the same purpose to bring it to life.
And as long as everybody's after the same thing, it's all fun.
The only major problems that we have with masquerades is a lot of conventions slough them off as, oh well, we have to do this and they really don't know what they're doing.
And the biggest tragedies are when the contestants are mistreated by the convention because the convention really doesn't care about the contestants and what they're doing.
And they really don't care if it's well run and the masquerades just kind of an afterthought.
And that's the only time I've seen any real problems.
Because most of these people have worked quite a while to put their...
A good example, which is a good example of a lot of things going wrong with the convention, was the ultimate fantasy and Houston convention which was held in Houston just recently.
It's already gotten in a lot of the magazines for the fiasco with the ultimate fantasy.
But a little known tragedy that people don't know about is at one time it was scheduled that there was to be a masquerade.
And we went and there were a lot of really wonderful costumes that showed up.
And I mean costumes that could have won on a regional level.
And what turned out is there almost wasn't a masquerade at all.
It was kind of a joke.
There was no official judges. Fortunately by the good graces of Richard Penny, who with his wife Wendy, they do the ElfQuest books.
He showed up, got a couple other people to join with him and they went ahead and did judging and announced a winner and so forth.
But the convention itself had sort of washed its hands of the whole thing and was just going to leave the masquerader standing there with a rock band playing in the background.
When what they'd come to do was the masquerade, not dancing costume.
You can do that on Halloween at any local disco.
But it worked out because again the pros worked with the costumers to try and make it work.
And although there were no prizes, at least there was a costume contest and there was an award and people didn't feel quite so cheated.
But the con had just kind of sloughed it off.
I don't want to open a can of worms.
But there is a controversy about weapons and the costumers. Is that just kind of a mini bruhaha?
Actually there is a big deal about weapons but it generally has nothing to do with the masquerade.
Because unless a masquerade is very poorly run, they usually have enough space where you can do pretty well anything you want.
If you kill yourself on stage, that's your tough luck.
It's a good idea when using weapons, if you're going to do anything with a weapon for God's sake, choreograph it until you know absolutely perfectly what you're doing before you ever get up on stage and flourish a weapon.
The weapons bruhaha is mainly over weapons being worn on costumes in the halls.
Now we don't have as much a problem with it here in the Southwest as they do other places.
But the flak that's coming down from other places has reached here.
Basically what happens is you have a lot of kids who get ahold of a sword and they throw it on their Conan costume and they draw it in the halls and so forth.
We've managed to stop most of that because there are simple rules of courtesy which can be observed in weapons or strictly, most of us observe weapons as strictly a piece of jewelry that is worn with the costume to complete it.
And if you look at it that way, it's very safe and you never draw it in public except with permission by all around and you certainly never do duels in the hallway.
Dules are strictly for the masquerade or join a society like the creative and acronyms where you can fight if you really want to fight.
And a lot of conventions rather than ban them have instead instituted a policy that if you draw it where you're not supposed to or if you threaten some with it where you're not supposed to, you lose it for the duration of the convention.
And the ones who have done that and who have let groups like the society enforce their rules who have a very strict code of honor concerning weapons haven't had any problem.
And the main problem isn't with the normal fans and the people who do costuming and who are serious about what they do.
The main problem is with the kids or the people off the street who think weapons are a neat fun toy and oh boy now we can sword fight because we're at a convention.
Or oh boy now we can shoot somebody with a water pistol because we're at a convention.
It's not allowed anywhere else and it's not allowed at a convention either.
Conventioning does not give you an excuse to do these kind of bad things and it's a few who are trying to ruin it for the many.
And that's basically all the weapons thing is.
The best weapons policy I've seen for a major convention is what Chicago had.
I did not attend Chicago but I did read their weapons policy.
And basically it stated keep your blade if you're wearing a blade keep it sheathed at all times unless you were showing the blade in which case you have to do it in a basically secluded spot.
Make sure there's no one around who could be startled by your drawing the blade.
Make sure they know you're doing it and strictly to show not in a defense or attack position but in a showing position where it could not possibly be construed as a threat.
Even then the con had the right if they thought you were drawing it in a threatening manner to confiscate it.
No weapons that shot things.
No water guns.
No frisbee guns.
Nothing that shot any kind of actual substance even if it was just water.
Nothing that looked like a real gun because there have been occasions when people have brought real weapons into a hotel.
Even if they had nothing to do with the convention it caused problems.
So no replicas that looked like real guns even if it does go with the costume.
And courtesy about how you wear them so that you don't slam into people's legs because your sword stuck out behind you.
And no live-streaming.